Today, we're gonna be learning about Rust.
I hope everyone's really excited about it.
I've specifically tried to make
this the easiest transition
from TypeScript to Rust.
So a lot of these examples will be
using TypeScript as a foundation, so
that way you can relate what you already
know to something you don't know.
And here's the things we're
gonna be talking about.
I know some of you will be disappointed by
the list, because no, there's no async,
no, there's no lifetimes.
Those are very hard to kinda fit
into such a short period of time, so
we're just gonna try to
really get the foundation.
The words that are confusing the first
time you hear them will be less confusing
by the end.
And by the end,
you should hopefully have the skills to
google your way through a mid-sized
CLI application, something like that.
Some assumptions I'm gonna make, I hope
that you don't take this offensively.
You're a bad programmer.
Don't worry, I'm a bad programmer.
John Carmack, good programmer, also can
choke you out with Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu.
I assume you can do TypeScript.
Everyone in here I've already talked to,
they can do TypeScript.
I'm looking for
someone that understands this right here.
This is about the level
that I would expect,
is that this shouldn't be very hard for
you to understand.
This is just simply a promise that has
been exploded, grabbed all the parts and
I'm returning it.
And if you can understand how
this generic plays into this,
we're looking pretty good then.
Then you're at about
the right TypeScript level.
We're gonna get just slightly more
complicated than that with Rust.
All right, everyone feels good?
Is this confusing to anybody,
other than why would you do that?
Actually, I do this for an interview
question all the time, it's fantastic.
All right, so why Rust?
Well, there's a bunch of reasons,
but two are very important to me.
Number one, ergonomics.
Everyone loves that word.
It's like the Steve Ballmer
chant of our generation.
He wouldn't yell developers UDL, developer
ergonomics over and over again now.
And so this may seem kind of
counterintuitive cuz everything you've
heard about Rust is it's super,
super hard.
Well, actually,
it's one of those things that if you can
remember your first time programming and
learning how to program, how
a function works was super, super hard.
How classes work, it was super,
super hard, method, super, super hard.
Maybe a for loop was kind of easier,
you can kinda logically walk through it.
But anytime you have to learn something
kind of novel, it's always super hard, and
Rust just has more novel things
in comparison to say something
like TypeScript.
TypeScript is a fairly easy language, so
you don't have too many hurdles to jump.
Whereas Rust has more things to jump, but
once you've done it, there's things that
are very easy about Rust that are just
extremely difficult in TypeScript to do.
And so it's more expressive.
It allows a different way
to look at the world.
And that's really good to
kind of have in your head.
And some really specific things is
specifying read-only versus mutation.
JavaScript, or TypeScript specifically,
you say read-only.
And read-only doesn't always
work if you don't know.
If you have read-only properties and
you pass it to a function that will mutate
those properties, TypeScript just says,
hey, that's okay cuz read-only properties
don't exist, whereas with Rust, you
have to specify when you can mutate it.
It's kind of a fundamental design decision
that's a little bit different which allows
you to always think ahead where
you want to change something.
That just means you're gonna be thinking
more and more about your program,
you're making less and less mistakes.
A good classic example is array.reverse,
it returns an array.
So your initial thought is that it just
returned you a new array that's reversed.
Well, joke's on you, it's just
returning you your own array, and
it's reversed it in place, and you didn't
know until you've experienced calling
that function, and
it's been reversed on you.
Undefined and null versus option,
options, at first,
are kind of annoying to work with,
why would you want options?
Undefined, null, pretty easy,
but after some time,
you realize how good an option is,
and how annoying undefined is.
Lastly, I think this is the biggest one
for me in the ergonomic department,
errors as values versus
errors being thrown.
So JavaScript, you throw errors.
But what's worse about JavaScript is that
you don't even know what functions throw
errors.
You know that 0.1% of always
failing code in production and
no one knows why it's failing?
Well, you can't know because no one
tells you where things can break.
You just have to discover it
with passion and late nights,
that is how you do with JavaScript.
Whereas Rust,
it's gonna tell you before you program,
this function has a possibility of
erroring, you need to think about it.
But it doesn't have the whole if or equals
nil problem of go, does not equal nil.
And then second one, skill gap, yes,
skill gap, what do I mean by this?
Typescript is really, really simple.
If you are already familiar with
programming, say you have learned Python,
you've learned some other language, you
could learn pretty much enough to build
anything of your same skill level
in TypeScript in an afternoon.
It's not a complicated language.
It may feel complicated.
Long as you're not doing the complex
XState library stuff and
you're just doing just application
programming, it's a simple language.
There's not a lot to it, and so your
expressiveness is limited by what you know
about it, and
there's just not a lot to know about it.
Whereas Rust, there's a lot of
deep topics, things I still don't,
I don't know how to do
procedural macros yet.
There's a lot to the language
that is just immensely deep and
you can do just the coolest
things with it.
So for me, I really like that.
I like something in which I
can invest more time into and
learn new techniques to do things.
I'm not just simply, well,
this is what I use, so
now I gotta go find out ways to do things.
And some things in
TypeScript are just hard.
A good example would be untagged unions,
if you don't know what that means.
So a string or a number,
you have to do runtime type
guards to find out what it is.
And that can be very frustrating if
you've ever ran into that kinda stuff,
especially if it's really large.
So my goals today are this.
I wanna make sure that at the end of this,
you can just build or
google your way to be able
to build an application.
I think that's really important, because
I can't make you good at Rust in one day,
it's a harder language
to get initially over.
But I can at least define the words so
that when you see them again,
you have a good idea what they mean and
it won't be so confusing.
Cuz the first time I heard option,
the first time I used an option,
the first time I used a result,
or the way enums work in Rust, it was very
hard or complicated or unusual for me.
And so it just takes a little bit longer
to kind of wiggle those things out.
Here's all the things we won't cover.
I'm not gonna cover
creating your own errors.
Those small portion where we're actually
defining errors in our application,
we're gonna use a library called anyhow.
It just makes it super easy for
application code to create errors.
We won't be doing any Wasm/UI stuff,
no async stuff, no smart pointers and
interior mutability.
I know,, $10 implementations,
but for you, it's like a $1 API.
Very, very simple to use them, but
they are very actually complicated.
No lifetimes, again lifetimes, they're
very hard to get to the point to show you
something where you can
use them in a real sense.
It's easy to show you a toy example.
I could right now just show you a struct
that has a reference and has a lifetime,
and yay, but it won't hit home unless if
we can get something that's worth it.
So I couldn't come up with something
that is easy enough to get to, and so
we just didn't do it.
Macros, both procedural macros or
declarative macros,
these are super awesome,
but at the same time,
they're just too complicated to
try to fit into this time slot.
So here's a cool example of one right now.
Anything that has a bang in it,
that's a macro.
So view bang, this is real code right now.
Leptos has this, a couple other libraries
that work on the front-end have this,
where you can write
effectively JSX inside of Rust.
But here's the cool part, there's no
transpiler, there's no any of that,
it just works, works with your LSP,
everything's great.
That's because in Rust, macros are a first
class citizen, you use tokens and stuff.
Not like the C ones,
if you're used to C, C is like,
I'm just gonna effectively
do text replacement.
Whereas this one is, I'm gonna do token
expression and manipulate them and
build you out actual AST.
And so it's super, super cool.
Not a lot of fun and
I'm very, very bad at them.
I didn't make that.
Who am I?
I am CEO, CEO, CEO, and CEO and
Chairmen of the board of TheStartup.
Here's some pictures of my Twitch and
YouTube.
I do a lot of that content, I think
that's probably what I'm best known for.
I also work at Netflix, but I feel like
that's just not as cool as my YouTube or
Twitch.
And there you go.